[theme music]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
Feeling misunderstood
is painful for anyone.
This is magnified many
times over for those
in society who have
always felt misunderstood,
who have gone astray,
and ended up in prison.
One misspoken word
can lean to violence
and a life filled with
unspeakable levels of stress.
But what if someone who cares
and is skilled in listening
can make societies inmates
feel valued and heard?
What could happen
to their lives?
Doug Noll is an
attorney and mediator
who was inspired by the plea
of an incarcerated woman
to teach inmates
new skills to reduce
the horrors of prison violence.
He's with us today to speak of
this program Prison of Peace.
I'm so happy to have you here.
I know some people
said, why are you
doing a show on
prisons, and prisoners,
and the incarcerated?
The reality is people who've
been able to pull themselves
up amidst some of the most
challenging situations that
exist on earth,
those are my heroes.
They are my heroes.
And someone like you
who is facilitating
this, where it didn't exist
at all is another of mine.
You're another my heroes.
>> DOUG NOLL: Thank you.
>>REGINA: I really
appreciate what
you're doing, because
you're doing the tough work.
So I want to talk first
about your own start.
Can I read a quote
from Bernie Sanders?
>>NOLL: Oh, sure.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I know
you know the quote.
And I love it.
So I want to read this first.
"We must end the
over incarceration
of non-violent young
Americans who do not pose
serious threat in our society.
It's an international
embarrassment
that we have more
people locked up
in jail than any other
country on Earth,
more than even the communist
totalitarian state of China."
And that puts in the
proper perspective.
What we're doing in the
prison system is a disgrace.
>>NOLL: Well, it is.
But more importantly,
if we release inmates,
we need to support them.
And more importantly, we
need to invest in children,
because those inmates are
in there for a reason.
And when you listen to their
stories and the tragedies
and the horrors they have been
subjected to that puts them
in prison the first
place, we begin
to recognize that our whole
social network is corrupt,
and that we have prisons
because we are not
willing to invest in children.
And fundamentally, we have
to invest in our children.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Now let's get to your
story before we start
moving into the larger story.
You're an attorney.
>>NOLL: I am an attorney.
>>REGINA: And let's talk
about your background
and what happened in your
life that catapulted you
down this road that you
probably never ever would
have guessed you'd be in.
>>NOLL: This is true.
So very briefly, I grew
up in Southern California.
I went to Dartmouth College.
I came back to California.
I went to law school.
I graduated with honors
and was on the law review.
I ended up clerking for a judge
for a year, which is what you
did back in the early 1970s.
And then went to a
law firm, where they
grew me to be a trial lawyer.
And I joined that firm in
1978, in September of 1978,
tried my first jury trial
in November of 1978.
>>REGINA: I've
always wondered, that
has to be the most frightening
thing, the first jury trial.
>>NOLL: It was a
little nerve wracking,
but it was exciting too.
And so I embarked
on a 22-year career
as trial lawyer, a big
time-- civil trial,
where I did not do any criminal
work at all and handling
very large amounts of money,
very sophisticated problems.
And along the way, I
pick up the martial arts.
And by the time I was 40, I
had earned my second degree
black belt.
And a couple weeks
after, my teacher
awarded me the second degree.
He called me into his office,
and he said, you're done.
You're too aggressive.
You're too mean.
To you, a fair fight is
five guys with knives
and you unarmed.
You're a trial lawyer.
You're going to hurt yourself.
You're going to
hurt somebody else.
So I'm not teaching
you anymore until you
go master tai chi, which I
didn't understand at the time
was a death sentence, because
you never mastered tai chi.
And tai chi is the oldest
of all martial arts.
And all martial arts
come from tai chi.
And tai chi, actually, in and
of itself is quite violent.
But there are two paradoxes
that changed my life.
The first paradox is the softer
you are, the stronger you are.
And the second paradox
is the more vulnerable,
the more powerful you are.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>NOLL: So soft to be strong,
vulnerable to be powerful
did not compute.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I'm sure it didn't
to a man like you.
>>NOLL: However, I practiced
and studied under masters.
And one day, about
five years later,
I was trying a case
and cross examining
somebody in my own
inimitable aggressive style.
And the thought came to me, what
the hell am I doing in here?
And so at the end of that
trial, I had a vacation plan
and spent 10 days white
water rafting with friends.
And I spent the week powering
through these big rapids
up in Central Idaho
in my raft, all
by myself, thinking about
my career as a trial lawyer.
And I am I came
to the conclusion
that this is not my calling.
So when I got back
to town, I live up
in the mountains halfway between
Yosemite and Kings Canyon
National Park.
So my practice is based out of
Fresno, California and Central
California.
And I came down and I
heard the one and only
public service announcement
for a new master's degree
in Peacemaking and
Conflict Studies.
I went, oh, that sounds
kind of interesting.
And it was being offered
at Fresno Pacific
University, which is the West
Coast Mennonite University.
And the Mennonites
are one of the three
traditional Protestant
peace churches.
So I ended up enrolling.
And I was the first
lawyer in the program.
And I obtained my master's
degree, and it changed my life.
Because as I went
through that program
and began to learn
about human conflict
and recognize what the
limitations of the law were,
I began to see things in a
completely different way.
And so that led to huge
conflicts in the law form,
of course.
And ultimately, I left the law
firm in 2000, with no planning
and opened up my own peacemaking
practice in November, 2000.
>>REGINA: Who are your clients?
>>NOLL: Well, at
that time, and still
today my clients are varied.
They can be people
who are involved
in litigating disputes, where
they need a mediator to help
negotiate a settlement.
Or I developed-- especially,
in the large family business
conflicts, I work with some
of the largest families
in California, where they
have internal business
and personal conflicts,
intra-organizational conflicts,
typically on the board of
directors or between partners.
So any kind of human conflict
where there's complexity,
there is deep anger
and frustration,
and people needed
to solve problems
that they can't solve
themselves, but usually
because of the emotionality.
Those are the kinds of
people who tend to call on me
and engage me to help them
work through the process.
>>REGINA: So that's more
or less your day job?
>>NOLL: That's my day job.
That's what pays the bills.
Well, paid the bills, because
once I got into the Prison
Project, you know, a lot of
that went by the wayside,
because it really became
a full-time project,
even though it's pro bono.
Laurel and I sacrificed
a lot to do work.
For all the decade
of 2000, I just
had some amazing experiences.
I was able to do leadership
work with Mobius Executive
Leadership, which took me
all the world teaching people
dynamic transformed
leadership using the skills
that I learned in
problem solving.
I got very interested
in neuroscience
and was tutored by a
professor at Caltech.
>>REGINA: Now that's
going to play a key.
Well, I'm going to ask you
some questions about that.
>>NOLL: Yes.
And I'm, in fact,
as far as I know,
I'm the first
person to ever write
about neuroscience and
conflict in my first book
back into 2002.
And then, of course, it
became neuro everything.
And so I really
became interested
in what causes conflict
between human beings
and what are the best
interventions that we
can utilize to help people when
they are so mad they'd rather
shoot each other with AK47s
than sit down at the table
and try to work out
their differences.
And so I became a real
student of conflict and peace.
And so that's,
basically, what I've been
doing the last 15 or 20 years.
>>REGINA: So before we get
into the project and the people
involved in project, let's
talk about the neurosciences.
There are all different kinds.
There's radical truth.
There's non-violent
communication.
There are all of these different
ways that people propagate
the notion of having
peaceful resolution,
but what you have
found is really
something quite different.
>>NOLL: Right.
I am interested in what works.
I'm not interested
in what doesn't work.
And what I've
learned is that a lot
of people who do the
work that I do and also
a lot of people who
are on the periphery--
they're peace builders, or
they're spiritual people,
or they're religious people--
tend to do a lot of exhorting.
Oh, we should be peaceful.
Oh, we should listen better.
You need to listen better
to get rid of your conflict.
But they never teach people
actually have to do it.
And so I became very interested
in how do we really teach this,
and then how do we
really practice this?
And I came across
a series of-- and I
began to look at literature.
What does the science tell
us about how the human brain
processes human conflict?
And I learned a
tremendous amount.
Probably the most-- there
are many influential studies,
but probably the most
influential was one in 2007
by UCLA Neuroscientist
Matthew Lieberman, who
wrote the book "Social,"
which became a bestseller
a couple of years ago.
But this study had to do with
how we can actually de-escalate
strong emotions in the
emotional centers of the brain
by helping people
label their emotions.
And he called the
technique affect labeling.
And without going into all
the science, essentially, what
happens is that emotions arise
in certain parts of the brain.
They're in the
center of the brain.
We've got a process them through
our language centers, which
are two areas on the outside
of the brain called Wernicke's
area and Broca's area.
All that's going
to be coordinated
through the prefrontal cortex.
Very complex.
And we are not born innately
with strong neuronal
connections between
the emotional centers
of the brain or language centers
and the prefrontal cortex.
We have to learn this stuff.
And it turns out that we learn
rudimentary communication.
We learn language
skills, but we never
learned how to pay attention
to other people's emotions.
And that is the secret.
So what based on a Lieberman's
work, and a lot of study,
and a lot of our own research,
and a lot of our own training,
and teaching, and
observations, we
have learned that the
foundational skill
is very simple.
When you are trying to
de-escalate somebody,
in other words, you're facing
somebody who's very angry,
and they're screaming
and yelling at you,
and they may be
starting to get violent,
you go the violent
route-- which I've
done with the
martial arts-- or you
could do something different.
And what you do different
is you ignore the words.
It doesn't matter what
people are saying.
>>REGINA: You try to just
connect with the feeling that
is being projected.
All you do is pay attention
to what their emotions are,
and you guess at their emotions.
And the second thing you
do is you simply state back
their emotional experience
in a very simple declarative
sentence.
You're angry.
You're frustrated.
You feel disrespected.
You don't feel listened to.
Notice that I'm not
using an I statement.
So I'm not saying what
I hear you saying is X.
And I'm not asking a
question, oh, are you angry?
All I'm doing is simply
guessing at the emotions.
And the other thing that happens
is that we have emotions always
come in layers.
And they're five basic layers.
And so we start
at the top layer.
And we just keep working
through the layers
until we get a very precise
physiological unconscious
reaction from the person.
So I'm going to see
a nod of a head.
I'm going to see a nod of the
head, a yellow verbal response,
yeah, that's right.
I'm going to see an exhale and
a relaxation of the shoulders,
all unconscious.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>NOLL: And when I
see-- when I teach--
and when we see that
unconscious reaction,
which usually takes
about 30 seconds--
>>REGINA: That's it.
>>NOLL: That's it.
It takes longer to
argue with somebody
than it does to
de-escalate them.
And people don't believe this,
until they start doing it.
And even then they
can't believe it.
They said, oh, no
that couldn't be.
And I have thousands of stories
of people in prison and out,
because I teach this all
over the world, where
people try this.
And they can't believe it.
Is it really going to work?
And then it works,
and they're astounded.
But yes, it takes 30 to
45 seconds to de-escalate.
It doesn't matter how angry the
person is, 30 to 45 seconds.
And you watch for this
physiological response,
and then you stop.
And you're done.
Now when I'm working as
a mediator in a conflict,
especially highly
escalated conflict,
I might use this skill 100 times
in a mediation and a mediation
day in an eight
or nine hour day.
So people, they escalate.
They get angry and frustrated.
They become emotional, and
then I de-escalate them.
We do some more problem
solving, and then they
get escalated again.
And I de-escalate them.
We have problem solving.
So it's not just something.
It's not a one time deal.
It's something that
you do consistently.
What we have found
in teaching parents
in dealing with
children when they do
this is that they're
teaching their kids how
to be emotionally intelligent.
They're actually
reprogramming the human brain
and making the connection
between emotions-- which
is what happens in the
brain-- to feelings, which
is sort of the physiological
physical feelings
that we have to the
words of emotion,
the categories of emotions
that we create with language
and associating all that
in the prefrontal cortex
to create meaning.
And what we do when we
affect label is literally
rewire the brain to allow people
to make those connections.
>>REGINA: But first, there
has to be a mature person
on one side of it.
>>NOLL: I wouldn't say mature.
I would say some skilled person.
>>REGINA: A skilled
person, if the mature.
>>NOLL: There you go,
and that's the secret.
>>REGINA: Because I'm
thinking about this even
in family situations, in spousal
situations, which is were
conflict is so common.
>>NOLL: That's right.
>>REGINA: Someone has to
keep their head about them.
>>NOLL: And that is that
is what I've learned
is the fundamental problem
is because the skill is not
innate, it must be taught.
You must have somebody who
has the skill, learning it.
And so my mission now-- it
started in the prisons--
and now is teach this skill
to anybody who wants to learn.
And actually there's
online course
that I put up that people
can-- if they want to go.
It's puremagic.com.
They could learn how to--
>>REGINA: Puremagic.com,
so anyone can go there?
>>NOLL: Anyone can go there.
>>REGINA: There's no barrier.
You don't have to whip
out your credit card?
>>NOLL: Well, you got
to pay some money. $50.
>>REGINA: $50, but that's
the most important lesson
you're going to learn
in your lifetime.
>>NOLL: Well, not
only that, but it's
just-- that's just a one--
I've had museums pay $50
and teach how their
docents how to do this.
>>REGINA: Yeah, absolutely.
>>NOLL: So it's not
about the money.
>>REGINA: At $50, no,
it's not about the money.
But--
>>NOLL: In that, if you take
that, download the workbook,
find a trusted friend, spend
a Saturday afternoon going
through the eight
lessons, you're
going to learn how do that.
>>REGINA: Oh my god.
You could save families.
You could save marriages.
And this is not even getting
into the really tough stuff.
>>NOLL: That's right.
The stories are unbelievable
that I get back.
How people have used this
in so many different ways
in their families,
and their workplaces,
and their relationships and
just say no wonder you call it,
it's pure magic.
>>REGINA: You know, what I'm
finding interesting in society
at large-- and so prison
being the extreme of that--
is that as life becomes more
stressful in Western culture--
well, now globally--
as like becomes more
stressful, as people are really
in more survival mode then
creative mode now,
it's as though they're
consciousness is imploding.
And you want to call it
self-centeredness, but it's
simply
>>NOLL: Survival.
Survival is a good word.
>>REGINA: --survival.
You don't have any energy
to be aware of much
outside of this stuff.
>>NOLL: So here's a really cool
thing about this technique.
And your audience will
appreciate this more
on Gaiam TV.
When you do this, you
experience oneness.
>>REGINA: Oh, yes.
Absolutely.
>>NOLL: Because
what happens is when
you are so focused on the
other person's emotions,
your ego dissolves.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>NOLL: You become
one with them.
You become one with
your higher self.
And you experience
a transcendence
for about 15 or 20 seconds
that it's absolutely addictive.
And that's why this so
powerfully reinforcing.
>>REGINA: I just love
what you're doing.
And to me, there's nothing
more important on this planet
with people who are by
as a result of survival
issues, the self-absorbed,
not being aware
of other people's emotions,
hardly aware of their own.
>>NOLL: And being deluged
with stuff that's junk.
>>REGINA: Stuff, stimuli, junk.
I mean, this is really
an important mission.
So anyway, I just wanted
to get-- yeah, go ahead.
>>NOLL: I was just going
to say-- so it's really--
I mean, just to get
into the Prison Project,
the way that started-- well, we
can talk about how it started.
But what really intrigued
me in that moment
when Laurel read Susan Russo's
letter to me-- which we get to
in a moment-- is I
thought to myself here
is an opportunity to
really prove whether or not
this stuff works.
Because if I can go into
maximum security prisons
and teach murderers how
to be effective listeners,
peacemakers,
mediators, than what's
wrong with the rest of us?
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>NOLL: And that's
what got me started.
>>REGINA: That's
what intrigued me too
is that you were able to do--
you've been able to do this.
So OK, so tell us who Laurel
is and set up Susan Russo.
And then we're going to
go to video clip of Susan.
>>NOLL: So Laurel Kaufer is
one of the most amazing women
in the world.
She is a mediator like
myself and a lawyer.
She lives in
Southern California.
And I don't have enough
time to talk about all
of her attributes,
but she is one
of these woman when
she sees a great need,
she does what she
can to fill the need.
And as a result of
Hurricane Katrina,
she went on her own
dime to the Gulf Coast
and ended up starting the myth
Mississippi Mediation Project
and taught the
state of Mississippi
how to mediate their speeds
instead of how to use violence.
And to this day,
here's a Jewish woman
from Southern California
going to the Deep South,
teaching the communities
there, all the communities,
the rural communities
and the larger cities,
people how to mediate.
And I mean that's just Laurel.
And she's just this
amazing human being,
who is incredibly tenacious
and has compassion.
>>REGINA: Obviously, great
empathy and compassion.
>>NOLL: Oh, yes, and
a wonderful teacher.
And so we've had an
incredible collaboration.
So what happened was that
in August, August 10,
I think, of 2009, I got
a phone call from her.
And I live up in
central California,
and she's down in Los Angeles.
And I got a call from her.
And she said, hey, I
just got this letter,
and I don't know whether
it's junk or not,
but let me read it to you.
And I said, well, who's it from?
And she says, well,
it's from a woman
by the name of
Susan Russo, who's
serving a life sentence in a
women's prison in Chowchilla.
She says, by the way,
where's Chowchilla?
And I go, well, that's about
an hour and a half north of me.
And she says, OK,
that's what I thought.
So she read the letter to me,
and Susan is serving a life
sentence, and she's now at the
Southern California Women's
Facility, which is
also in Chowchilla.
And basically, she
was writing a letter
on behalf of 50 women
who were serving
life sentences in this women's
maximum security women's
prison, who were
tired of the violence.
And they wanted somebody
to come in and teach them
mediation skills.
They barely knew the
difference between mediation
and meditation.
And as it turns out, they
had written 50 letters,
and this was the 50th letter.
And nobody had responded
to the letters.
So Laurel read me the letter
and said, what do you think?
And I thought about it
for about a nanosecond,
and I thought, if
this is legit, we
should do this,
because I thought,
as I said before, if we can
teach these skills effectively
to murderers and teach them
to be effective peacemakers,
then nobody can
gain, say, what I'm
talking about as a peacemaker.
So we did.
We followed up.
It took us about
six months going
through incredible
bureaucratic hurdles
to finally get the permission
to start a pilot program,
and we started
training our first 17
women in March of 2010.
>>REGINA: So shall
we go to Susan Russo
and let her tell her
part of the story?
>>NOLL: And let me
just say that we
were able to get in
with some filmmakers,
and so the clips that
we're going to be seeing
are clips from about 40
hours of interviews we've
taken with the women in
the prison over the years.
So we've been able to
capture a lot of this.
>>REGINA: Yes, OK.
So let's take a
look at Susan Russo
and why she felt
compelled to do this.
[video playback]
-I worked so long and
hard on this project,
because it was
something that meant--
it was very important to me.
Being a lifer, it's
difficult. It's not easy.
So this not only was
going to benefit me,
but it was going to
benefit the community.
[end video playback]
>>REGINA: Yes, that's
very compelling.
I mean, most of us
can't fathom what
it's like to fear for your own
well-being every single day,
unless you're raised in a
family of violence, which is
where a lot of these came from.
>>NOLL: Well, first of all,
prisons are violent places.
But what's even
more amazing to me
is how many women--
every single woman
that we worked with
has been raped,
has been physically
abused, and most of them
had been drug addicted
to one degree or another.
Men, too, for that
matter, because we
work in both the men's
prison and women's prisons.
And the horror of
their upbringing
is-- you couldn't write
something that horrific.
We were working with
one young woman,
who told us the prison was
the safest place she's ever
been in her life.
>>REGINA: Yes, yes.
>>NOLL: And a lot of
these women feel that way
because of what they
had to suffer from.
And there's a reason.
I mean, I'm not condoning
anything that they've done,
but there is a reason why.
There's a reason
why people murder,
and people don't come out
of wombs as murderers.
We breathe and program
murderers in our society.
We create them.
We allow families
to create them.
Our society allows
this to happen,
and that is why we
have this violence.
It's not because humans
are inherently violent.
They aren't.
We have the capacity
for violence,
but it's got to be something
that's programmed and taught,
and it's taught
over and over again
from abuse and both physical,
emotional, and spiritual abuse
of people.
And that's why I
said that if we want
to really solve our
social problems,
we have to invest in children.
>>REGINA: Yes, and
I mean, that would
have to be true, because
you're programming people
to have empathy, to
be able to listen,
to participate in peace, so if
you can be programmed one way,
we can be all
programmed both ways.
>>NOLL: Exactly.
And that's the good news
about the prison project
is that the big
takeaway is that it
doesn't matter if you're set.
We have inmates who are
70 and 80 years old.
We have people who
are gang bangers.
are Aryan Brotherhood.
I mean, incredible diversity of
ethnicity and religious beliefs
and all kinds of
different beliefs,
and we're able to take the
hardest of the hardcore, who
are willing to change
and willing to listen
and willing to
learn and practice,
and we can reprogram them.
They can reprogram
themselves with our training.
And that's what has happened.
And it has been one of the
most amazing transformative
experiences I have ever
witnessed as a human being.
>>REGINA: Oh, I can't imagine.
And you almost have
to be there up close,
but we're going to see a
couple clips of people.
Let me ask you something
and backtrack a little bit
ago, because in this,
we're talking primarily
about work in a women's
prison, but we're also
going to extend out to
work in men's prisons.
Just from the
neurochemical point
of view in terms
of future behavior,
the whole subject of
sexual abuse, and you
said all these women
had been through it.
What does this do to
split their psyche?
>>NOLL: Well, I'm not a
clinician, so I'm probably not
the best person
to speak to this,
but we do know that, obviously,
when people are subjected
to extreme trauma, and we enter
into this condition called
post-traumatic stress
disorder, that one
of the many things
that happens is
we get what's known as
a hyperactive amygdala.
In the amygdala are two little
almond-shaped processes.
Think of them as
mini computers that
are in the center of the brain
on both sides of our heads.
That is the basis for
our fear reaction system.
And the job of the amygdala is
to process raw sensory data,
and judge it as either safe
or dangerous, good or bad.
So it's binary.
And when people have been
subject to deep trauma,
the amygdala tends to
judge everything bad,
and it gets hyperactive
and immediately
triggers the rest of the brain
and the rest of the body to--
>>REGINA: It's like red alert.
>>NOLL: That's right.
Exactly.
And so that's what we see.
And when that happens, the
prefrontal cortex shuts downs,
so people can no longer think.
>>REGINA: So you
lose your ability
to basically be rational.
>>NOLL: To make choices.
That's right.
You lose your rationality.
You lose your ability
to make choices,
and you are on
programmed auto-pilot,
and if violence is what
your programming has been,
then that's where
you're going to go.
And that's what
happens in a nutshell.
And the clinicians
and scientists
would, of course, go into much
more in depth technical talk.
But essentially,
it's programming.
>>REGINA: But no, that's good.
That's helpful.
>>NOLL: And we're programmed
from experience to be this way.
And there is some
organic stuff that
happens where people's brains
aren't formed properly,
but mostly, it's programming.
Mostly, it's programming.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about--
the program has begun.
You've cleared
all the paperwork.
And you had to make
some strategic decisions
in the beginning,
and at first, when
I was watching the
video before I'd really
done much research into
it, I was wondering, now
why did you choose people
who were long term or life
sentences?
>>NOLL: Laurel and I have always
been of the opinion as trainers
that doing one-off trainings
are a waste of time.
And there are a
lot of people who
promise to conflict resolution.
I'll come into your
organization and teach you
conflict resolution in a week,
and your life will be good.
Well, that's just not true.
If you want to really have
impact in an organization
and have change, it
takes 18 to 24 months.
And then you need
sustainability beyond that.
So we decided to design this
program around training lifers
and very long
termers, who are going
to be in the prison for a
long time, who are motivated
for a peaceful
environment to teach them
how to be peacemakers,
mediators, and trainers,
so they could teach
and coach and mentor
all the inmates, who were short
termers coming in and out.
And our goal was to
teach inmates to teach
other inmates how to do this.
So we decided to work
with lifer population,
because our investment
of time in them
would be reflected
back many times over,
because they would be there
to help and teach and train
and mentor other inmates, who
were not going to be serving
long life sentences.
And that's exactly
what happened.
>>REGINA: So strategically,
yeah, it makes sense then.
And what was in it for
them is it says here,
your strapline is from serving
life to a life of service.
And this is really the crux
of what these women are
drawn to is, I'm here for life.
Does it have to
be this miserable?
>>NOLL: Right.
So part of what our project
is, we tell people this
is not a self-help program.
This is a program about
service to humanity.
If you want to learn
how to serve humanity,
you're in the right place.
If you want to just
get another chrono
and another nice little
gold star in your file,
this is not for you.
This is hard work.
And what we have done is
created a program and a pathway
for inmates to start serving
other inmates as peacemakers,
mediators, and teachers,
trainers, mentors, and coaches.
So that gives them, for the
first time in their lives,
many of them, great
and deep meaning,
because they see the results.
They hear the stories of
people they've trained,
and they've heard
about marriages
that have been reconciled and
relationships with children
that have been
completely recreated
in completely different ways
and people who've gotten out
and have written back saying
how their lives have completely
changed because of this.
And so that gives them meaning.
And when we have
meaning in life,
we can tolerate
just about anything.
And so that's why
we say what we do
is take people who are
serving life sentences
and teach them how to
live lives of service.
>>REGINA: Can you talk
a little bit about,
from the various men
and women you've met,
who are in for life, the
psychology of that situation
that the rest of us
can't really fathom.
>>NOLL: Talking about
some of the stories?
>>REGINA: Well, kind of
their deep psychology
of knowing they're never
going to be released.
>>NOLL: Most of
them, by the time
we get to them, most of
them have accepted the fact.
>>REGINA: This is their life.
>>NOLL: Right.
Now they are constantly
working on getting
letters of commutation.
They're filing lawsuits,
petitions for habeas corpus.
>>REGINA: So there's
still some hope for most
of the people in their minds.
>>NOLL: Many of them,
they're doing this,
but the reality is
that there is no hope.
I mean, it's very unlikely
that many of these
are going to get--
although I have
to say that of the 17
women that we started
with, eight have been released.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>NOLL: And a lot of that is
because of Prison of Peace,
because the parole board has
seen the dramatic changes
as a result of Prison of
Peace, so that's been exciting.
And as a result, we are
finally waking up to the idea
that the mass
incarceration movement has
been a complete and utter
social and financial failure,
that more and more
people are getting out.
So there is more hope today
than there was in the past,
but mostly, they have
to live with the fact
that many of them,
that if you're
living a sentence of life
without possibility of parole,
that you are in for life.
And this is where
you're going to live,
and it's your community.
And they seem to
have, most of them,
like any other
human beings, they
have up days and down days.
But they seem to
have adapted to it
as well as anybody can expect.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about-- you brought this
to a woman's facility, because
Susan Russo wrote to you.
But once you started dealing
with both men's and women's
facilities, was it
easier to introduce this
into women's facilities
than men's or not?
>>NOLL: Well, we
started with the women,
and then as a result of prison
realignment in California,
the original prison we started
in, which was a woman's prison,
was repurposed into
a men's prison.
And we had never intended
to expand this project
beyond one prison.
But when--
>>REGINA: It was just
kind of an experiment
to validate that
this stuff works.
>>NOLL: Right.
>>REGINA: And then
you saw the need.
>>NOLL: Well, what happened
was that as a result of AB
109 and California
prison realignment,
all the women were shipped
out of that prison.
They were moved into two other
women's prisons, so our women
were basically split.
By then, we had over
100 women trained,
and we said we would follow
them to either CIW in Southern
California or the Central
California Women's
Facility across the street.
At the same time, the staff
at the old prison that
was becoming a men's prison saw
how powerful this program was,
and they started calling
us and nagging us.
When are you bringing Prison
of Peace to the men's prison?
We really need it here.
We really want you
guys to do this.
Now you have to understand, this
is a totally pro Bono project.
We don't get paid for this.
There are no funders out there.
We have a file drawer
full of rejection letters
from foundations.
Nobody wants to fund any kind
of work with lifers of any kind,
and we have found
that we have had
to fund this ourselves at the
cost of about $50,000 a year
out of pocket, plus our own
professional time, which
varies from year to year.
But it's basically
about $150,000
each of our professional time.
And the idea of going into
yet a third prison just
didn't appeal to us.
But it was a men's prison.
So we talked and
talked and talked,
and finally, we both
decided, OK, let's try it.
So we started with a men's
prison in October of 2012,
and we found that the
men were much easier
to train than the women.
>>REGINA: Oh, my god.
Now there's a shocker.
What is it about that dynamic?
>>NOLL: The men--
how do I describe it?
They just--
>>REGINA: You don't have
to be politically correct.
Just share.
>>NOLL: I know.
The women, because they
had been so traumatized,
were extremely emotional.
And so when we want
walked in, we never
know what we were getting from
day to day with the women.
There are days when our
students would be ready to learn
and really happy,
and there would
be days when they were just
incredibly depressed or angry
or frustrated or whatever.
And then as we
worked with them, we
learned how difficult
this work is,
because it causes you
to have to look at who
you are as a human being.
And many of these women have
been shut down emotionally,
for that was their
survival mechanism.
So it was difficult.
>>REGINA: So you had a very
complex array of emotions
to deal with with the women.
>>NOLL: Correct.
That was on the service.
>>REGINA: Well, and
also, with women,
the notion of being
involved with violence,
you're almost always on
the receiving end, not the
giving end of it.
And so there are
such massive levels
of fear in the body and the--
>>NOLL: Not only that, but
then the defense mechanisms is
to put on this hard,
concrete exterior
we had to break through.
The men are much more
hierarchical in prison,
and they're much more
organized, socially organized.
And these men came in
skeptical, but ready to learn.
Certainly, they were
emotional, but we
weren't dealing with the
kinds of emotional outbursts
that we would get
with the women.
They tended to
constrain, although I
will say that the men
cried, and they cried a lot.
>>REGINA: To feel heard--
everyone cries when you
feel heard for the first time.
>>NOLL: That's exactly right.
And the second time.
>>REGINA: And the third time.
>>NOLL: You're right.
>>REGINA: Because no one
really feels heard in life.
>>NOLL: Never, anywhere in life.
>>REGINA: That's right.
>>NOLL: So we found
the men, and so when
we would tell the men to
show up, they showed up.
When we said it's time to go
to work, they would go to work.
When we said do
this, they did it.
And we got very little
kickback, and with women, it
was like herding cats.
So we were quite
surprised, because we
thought the men would
be a lot more hardcore.
And although we had many
men who are hardcore gang
bangers and really tough people,
they were pussycats with us.
And they were so
appreciative of us coming in.
And they realized week
after week after week,
we would come in and continue
teaching them training,
because this is not an easy
process we take them for.
Just to get to
the first level is
84 hours of classroom training,
and probably double that
of practice time and
homework, written homework,
and reading that
we have them do.
It's very rigorous what
we take them through.
And so we found the men to be--
>>REGINA: Easier than the women.
>>NOLL: Easier than the women.
And we ultimately, a
year ago, certified
our first male mediator,
who is 75 years old,
been in prison all his
life, over 40 years.
And he's-- along
with other ones--
he's just an amazing guy,
who's completely transformed
as a result of this.
>>REGINA: I love it.
I mean, it must have
been such a joy for you
to see how that man
came along, even
in the later years of
his life, to still want
to invest in this process.
>>NOLL: And what
was really funny
about him was how resistant
he was in the beginning.
Just couldn't-- and we see
this time and time again is
there's something about our
project that calls certain
inmates.
And they come in.
They don't know
why they're there.
They don't want to be there.
They hate the idea of
becoming peacemakers,
and yet they cannot stay away.
And they keep coming back and
coming back and coming back,
and they keep telling us,
they said, I hate this.
I hate what you guys
are going to me.
>>REGINA: But there's some
truth speaking from your side.
>>NOLL: But they can't
stay away either.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
So now let's talk about a really
big issue amongst all of this.
It's really at the
core of all of this.
I did some research,
obviously, and one thing
that kept coming
up again and again
is that prisons are
being used almost
as some kind of holding place
for people who really should be
in other kinds of facilities.
And I was running this
by a friend of mine,
who is a California death
row appeals attorney,
and we were talking about
prison reform in general.
And he said, it's just a shame
that people that are in prison
aren't necessarily the ones
that should be in prison.
They should be in other
kinds of facilities,
and I said, oh, yeah,
particularly like-- what
about white collar-- I
brought this up naively.
I mean, yeah, like white
color criminals, for example.
And he said, oh, no.
Those are the sociopaths.
The ones that do high
level white collar crime--
those are the true
sociopaths of society.
I completely disagree with you.
Those are the guys that ruined
so many lives and don't care.
They should be on death row.
And I was shocked
when he said that.
>>NOLL: I agree with that.
>>REGINA: But I
thought, you're right.
These are sociopaths.
Other people get caught up due
to circumstance and awful stuff
and can end up in prison.
These guys execute
it with intent.
>>NOLL: And many of them
suffer from what I call
overt maladaptive narcissism.
And it's the inability
to be empathic
and the inability to have good
boundaries around what's right
and what's wrong.
And they're dangerous people.
They're not violent.
They're just dangerous.
>>REGINA: They're
dangerous, and they ruin
a lot of lives in their way.
And so I wanted
to bring that up,
because that's one type
of person who you wouldn't
think should be there, but--
>>NOLL: To your point, if you
look at the statistics that
are out there on
the internet, you
will find that the Kennedy
administration started
the decline of mental
institutions, committee
and state-wide mental
institutions for good reason.
Because if you remember the
old movie, the Jack Nicholson
movie, "One Flew over
the Cuckoo's Nest,"
which really exemplified the
horrors of mental institutions.
>>REGINA: They were
run very poorly.
>>NOLL: Exactly.
And so there was good reason why
many of these state hospitals
should be shut down.
On the other hand, they were
never replaced with anything.
And when the mass incarceration
movement started in the 1980s
under the Reagan
administration, you
can see a direct relationship
between the decline
in mental health beds
across the United States
and the increase in prison
construction and people
incarcerated.
And today in Los Angeles
County, the LA County Jail
is the largest mental
institution in the world.
It has one full
facility dedicated
to nothing but
mentally ill people,
and I believe the population
is something between 8,000
and 10,000 inmates.
And these are inmates
that are not getting--
and the sheriff will
tell you very bluntly,
we do not have the resources,
the money, or the expertise
to treat these people.
To the extent that
we can keep them
on medication that helps them a
little bit, we try to do that,
but fundamentally, we are here
to incarcerate, not to treat.
And we put all
these people here,
because they have been
clinically diagnosed as having
some sort of mental illness.
8,000 people in
the LA County Jail.
And the state prison, the
California State Prison's
the same way.
There's just a huge--
I'm just going to guess.
I'm not an expert, but I
would guess it over 40% to 45%
of the people in
prison today have
some degree of mental illness.
>>REGINA: And then
let's add drug abuse.
>>NOLL: Then we add another
40% for drug addiction.
>>REGINA: So we're
really looking
at a low percentage of people
that are without empathy
or whatever that
one chief equality
is that you need to be
separated from society.
>>NOLL: There was a
certain population's group
that is dangerous.
They're dangerous to us.
They're dangerous to themselves.
They need to be
put away, put away
in the sense they need
to be put in a place,
where they are not going
to be a danger to society.
But that is a very
small minority
of the people that
are in prison today.
>>REGINA: Huge percentage
are in for drug abuse,
and for trafficking,
drug related crimes.
And when I first started
becoming interested
in this story was
quite a number of years
ago when I was given a
document, that I probably
shouldn't have had my hands on,
and I won't go into the detail.
But it delineated
the chain of command,
so to speak, on bringing
drugs out of Vietnam
in a horrific manner.
The high up people, very
high profile people,
we all know the names of
who were involved in it,
sanctioned it, passed it
on, and then literally
started not
inculcating, but started
putting those drugs
into releasing them
into the poor,
urban neighborhoods.
And now you end
up with something
that is now literally
about three,
four decades later,
systemic to cultures.
>>NOLL: And we're going
through a huge heroin epidemic
right now.
>>REGINA: And now
we're going through,
out of Afghanistan,
government-sanctioned-- well,
Black Ops sanctioned,
whatever you want to call it,
having government subsidize
their own coffers by running
drugs into these areas.
But there's another
purpose for it.
There's something much more--
Michelle Alexander wrote
about in her book,
"The New Jim Crow,"
and she wrote about
it very reluctantly.
It seems to be there's
also a very specific agenda
to incarcerate African Americans
starting from a young age,
and whole generations
are missing.
>>NOLL: Well, I don't subscribe
to conspiracy theories,
but I do believe that there is
a confluence of different types
of policies and conflicts within
our government in our culture
that do lead to
mass incarceration.
And the reason that it
perpetuates itself--
>>REGINA:
Disproportionately to--
>>NOLL: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: People of
pigment across the board.
>>NOLL: Absolutely
correct, and clearly
in a gross discriminatory
and racial manner.
Absolutely no
question about that.
And there's a confluence of
events that leads to that,
and the problem is that
to solve that problem
will take a conscious political
and social effort that most
people don't want to engage
in, because think about it.
Politicians get elected on fear.
And so when the
election cycle comes
around, if you're
running for the dog
catcher of the city of
Louisville, Colorado,
you're going to put up, I'm
running for dog catcher.
The Deputy Sheriff's
Association supports me.
I'm tough on crime, even
though being the dog catcher
has nothing to do with
anything on crime.
And you see that.
And the other exercise
that's really interesting
is to take your local newspaper,
whether you get it online
or not, and count the
number of headlines
that pertain to
crime, and divide that
by the total number of
headlines in the first section
of the paper.
And what you will find is that
the proportion is about 75%,
and there are reasons for that.
But the problem is that when
we as a culture get our news,
we think that there are
mass shootings everywhere,
and there's mass
violence everywhere.
>>REGINA: Well, the media's
propagating the notion
that life is to be feared.
>>NOLL: That's right.
And it's doing that because
young journalists are taught
that conflict is what
media is all about,
and the other thing that
people don't realize
is criminal activity
is publicly reported.
It's the cheapest
news to acquire.
It's very inexpensive to get
somebody to do the city beat
and report on crime.
It's really cheap and easy,
and so that fills up the paper.
And it's scintillating
for people.
So the problem is
that when we're
fed with this digest
of and to digest all
of this apparent violence, and
then when you add in that game
violence and television
violence and movie
violence and all of
this stuff, it adds up,
and it becomes very difficult
to change the inertia
of incarcerating people.
What people don't realize about
this mass incarceration problem
is the financial cost
to us as taxpayers.
In California, we spend $13
billion year on prisons--
just prisons, not police, not
courts, not law enforcement,
just the prison system--
and we spend $9 billion
a year on education, K
through graduate school.
>>REGINA: If we didn't
do in this hour,
except highlight
that one statement,
this is a very broken system.
>>NOLL: And what I don't get is
why the conservatives are not
going crazy about this.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>NOLL: You hear
the conservatives
talking about their antipathy
towards big government.
There is nothing bigger and more
bureaucratic than the prison
system and nothing more
costly at the state
level than our prison systems.
And what bang for the
buck are we getting?
None.
Nobody is feeling safer than
we felt 20 years ago when
we started building prisons.
>>REGINA: No, absolutely not.
And not only that,
we haven't even
factored into this the
privatization of prisons,
and there was just a
story in the headlines
that I think a $2.6
million settlement had
to be paid as a result of
judges, who were working
in coercion with private
prisons to start just
streamlining the youth
into the prisons,
just shovel them over there.
That just makes me sick.
>>NOLL: And the sad thing is
it doesn't have to be that way.
>>REGINA: No.
>>NOLL: Projects
like Prison of Peace,
even though it's a fairly
small project in three or four
prisons, and just two
lawyers trying to do good,
has demonstrated that
we can take people
who most people would say
are societal throwaways.
And we can redeem them.
We can have them
transform themselves,
and they can live
lives of service.
They can be effective
peacemakers.
They can go back into their
neighborhoods as people
who understand peace and
how to resolve conflict,
rather than as gang bangers.
We can do it, and
there's no reason
why we can't invest money in
projects like Prison of Peace,
instead of investing
in building prisons
and not really
solving the problem.
And I think that's
really my message
is that we do have alternatives
that work that are effective
that are cost effective,
and it doesn't matter
what your political stripe is.
If you're interested in social
change for the better, at least
cost, then take a look around,
because there's some really
good stuff out there.
>>REGINA: And how
are these same skills
playing out in halfway houses?
Because once people
get out of prison,
often there are no skills.
There's nothing to prepare
them for the outside world.
>>NOLL: That's changing,
at least in California.
When a person,
especially a long termer,
is preparing for parole, they
have to have a parole plan.
And that means they have to
go into an outside residential
facility, sometimes up
to a year to 18 months
before they can actually
leave, and they're
being programmed
in that facility
to learn how to
live a modern life.
And what's really
gratifying for us
is many of our Prison of
Peace trainers are now
teaching Prison of Peace--
>>REGINA: In the halfway houses.
>>NOLL: In the halfway houses.
>>REGINA: That's
fabulous, because that's
a skill that is going to serve
a person throughout the rest
of their life.
OK, now I know our
viewers are thinking, OK,
what is this that takes just
a few seconds to employ?
>>NOLL: So what
I'd like you to do
is-- we'll just have a
different kind of conversation.
Now I want people to recognize
that what they're going to see
might look very rude and
disruptive from the outside,
but we'll just see what
your experience is.
So what I want
you to do, Regina,
is I want you tell me a story of
something that's just happened
to you in the last
couple of days
that has just a little bit
of emotional content to it.
It could be happy or sad.
It doesn't matter.
And what I'm going
to do is I'm just
going to listen to you at a
deep, deep level in the way
that we do.
>>REGINA: But does it have
to be the last couple days?
>>NOLL: It can be
whatever is important.
No, it doesn't.
Whatever comes to mind.
>>REGINA: OK.
So I think that to be
in a situation where,
for some reason, I would
say something to a person--
I won't get into
specifics, obviously--
say something to a person,
have it totally misunderstood,
and then--
>>NOLL: That really
frustrates you.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>NOLL: And you feel
really disrespected,
and you don't feel listened to.
And it actually makes you sad.
>>REGINA: Yeah, for me,
I get sad right away.
>>NOLL: You get sad right away.
You feel a lot of
grief, because you
feel like nobody's supporting
you or listening to you.
And you feel deeply abandoned.
>>REGINA: You feel
abandoned, and I
feel like, well, wait a minute.
I didn't deserve that.
What did I say?
What did I do that caused
this situation to erupt?
>>NOLL: So you felt
unfairly judged,
and that was really
upsetting to you.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Absolutely.
>>NOLL: And at the
end of the day,
you feel really sad
and grief stricken,
because people really are not
paying attention to who you are
and what you are doing and what
you're saying as a human being.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>NOLL: And that's really sad.
>>REGINA: It is sad.
Yeah.
That's it.
>>NOLL: So what was that
experience like for you?
>>REGINA: Well,
everything, any resistance
you might have is futile,
because resistance is futile.
It's so simple, but immediately,
you think, but, but, but.
You're tempted to
say, but there's more.
But there's no
need to tell more.
The fact is you're
already grokking it
with a simple reflection
of the emotions.
>>NOLL: And how
long did that take?
>>REGINA: About 20
seconds, 30 maybe.
>>NOLL: And notice that
I stopped as soon as I
got the, yeah, that's right.
And you nodded your
head, and I stopped.
Now for people who are
watching this, what it might've
looked like is if I was
really interrupting you,
and I was because I
said-- I didn't even
let you go three seconds.
>>REGINA: No point.
>>NOLL: Well, but
here's the difference.
In our conversational norms, we
have rules around turn taking,
and the turn taking
rules say that when
you stop speaking is when
I get to start talking,
and if I start talking
before you stop talking,
then that's considered
rude and disrespectful.
But remember, when
we're talking,
we're talking from our own ego.
When I'm listening,
there is no ego involved.
All I'm doing is listening
to your emotions,
and so I can interrupt
you, as long as I'm stating
your emotions back to you.
And you will not only
not feel interrupted.
You will feel like that
is the deepest connected
conversational or listening
I've ever experienced.
>>REGINA: Yes, that's true.
>>NOLL: And this is the
counterintuitive part of this
technique and skill is
that people have to learn
to overcome their
social inhibition to--
>>REGINA: Jump in.
>>NOLL: --jump in, and not to
feel like they are patronizing
or that it's OK to tell
you what your feelings are.
There is a term, and
the term is a big word,
but it's called alexithymia.
Alexithymia is the
inability to state
what you're experiencing
in emotional words.
And at a clinical
level, it's quite bad,
but everybody experiences
it, because we don't have
strong emotional vocabularies.
All I'm doing is helping you
build the neural connections
between different
parts of your brain
so that you can take
what you've experienced,
and put it into words, put
your feelings into words.
>>REGINA: OK, I have
a question then.
As you said, that makes
you feel frustrated,
and it makes you not feel
heard, blah, blah, blah.
And it ends it up in sad.
Now does it always
end up in sad?
>>NOLL: Almost always.
It almost always comes
down to being abandoned.
>>REGINA: Being abandoned and
feeling alone in the world.
>>NOLL: And feeling alone
in the world, almost always.
The layers are anger
and frustration.
Then beneath that, disrespect,
not being listened to, deep
and abiding injustice.
Beneath that, fear and anxiety.
Beneath that, sadness and grief.
And then finally underneath,
absolute utter loneliness
and being totally
abandoned in the world.
And we all experience
the same emotions,
because we're all human beings.
And we experience
them in the same way
in the same layers
in the same levels,
and once you learn this,
that seven billion people
on the planet are all
the same, this technique
works with anybody.
It doesn't matter
what your culture is.
It doesn't matter what
your ethnicity is.
It doesn't matter
what your gender is.
It works because the human
brain responds to this
in exactly the same way.
Otherwise, you
wouldn't be human.
That's what makes
it so powerful.
>>REGINA: You're good.
>>NOLL: And you can deescalate
anybody in 30 seconds or less
using this technique.
>>REGINA: So again,
taking the responsibility.
Even someone watching,
just this, says,
OK, I think I can do this.
I think I can do it.
Can a person just take
what we've just done here
on themselves, and
then find themselves
in an argument with their child
or their spouse or something?
>>NOLL: I would say
no, only because people
are going to fall back to the
old, bad listening skills.
>>REGINA: Because your ego
starts becoming involved.
>>NOLL: That's right.
You're either paying
attention to the words.
You want to give advice, or
you emotionally invalidate,
or you start putting
an I statement,
and you start asking questions.
You have to practice
yourself out
of those old forms
of verbal response.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Tell us the name of
that website again.
>>NOLL: Itspuremagic.com.
>>REGINA: Itspuremagic.com.
>>NOLL: And it's a
referring website
that will take you over to the
website, where the course is.
>>REGINA: Excellent.
And what an investment
too for $50.
Learn to essentially bypass
conflict in your life
permanently.
>>NOLL: It is amazing
how this works.
I'm teaching this
in schools now.
I'm teaching teachers how to
deescalate angry students.
So the whole purpose
is not to kick kids out
of the classroom for
being disruptive,
but getting them calmed
down immediately.
And the teachers are
telling me stories--
it brings tears to your eyes
when you hear what's going on,
and what the teachers are
learning about the children
that they're working with.
I mean, I just don't believe it.
And the families-- I mean,
it's just unbelievable.
This is the greatest
work I've ever done.
I am so overjoyed and blessed
to be able to do this,
and to sit here and talk with
you and tell people about this,
because it is absolutely
life changing.
>>REGINA: It's meaningful.
It's deeply meaningful.
And thank you for having the
courage to basically trash
your career and your
bank count to do this
and offer this to people.
>>NOLL: Well, thank you.
>>REGINA: I know that it takes
a sacrifice, and the fact
that you are so passionate, and
you're so sensitive and caring,
good on you.
Thank you so much.
And what I want to do is run
one little clip at the end.
It's a statement of hope from
one of the women in prison.
Let's take a look.
[video playback]
-The awakening moment for
me with Prison of Peace
would be I did a peace
circle in an organization
that I started called YUP.
And it's called
Young United Players,
and it's for kids that were 17
or younger when they committed
their crimes, such as myself.
And I did this peace circle
with these girls, and I thought,
this is a very rowdy crowd.
They're 18, 19 years old.
They're not going
to understand this,
but I'm going to try it
anyways, because they
were very loud and kind of
obnoxious at the moment.
And I thought, I've got
to try to do this talking
piece with them and pass
this around and let them know
what a peace circle is about.
And I ended up telling them
what a peace circle was
and explaining what
I'm going to do
and what's going to
happen with the process,
and it went so amazingly well
that these girls, all they want
to do is peace circles now.
And in almost every
group that we have,
are we going to
do a peace circle?
Are we going to
And it's just so cute to
see them really, really
want to learn this.
And they're really getting
something out of it.
And for me, that was
a wakening experience
to realize that it
really does work,
and even when there was a
little bit of doubt in my mind
that, are peace circles
really going to work?
Are people really
going to look at them?
That just said it
all right there.
And seeing how they just changed
and the whole situation went
so well, it just inspired
me to do it more.
[end video playback]
>>REGINA: To learn
more about Doug's work,
you can go to prisonofpeace.org.
The stories are heart rending
and give us a fresh perspective
on how to view people who have
ended up in the unfortunate
circumstance of incarceration.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[theme music]